Welcome back in this lecture we're going to be discussing bar charts a barter presents categorical data
with rectangular bars with heights or lengths proportional to the values that they represent.
Let's go ahead and quickly review categorical data versus continuous data in order to understand when
certain plots apply to the data you're trying to visualize.
In general variables and data either represent measurements on some continuous scale or they represent
information about some categorical or discrete characteristics.
So let's see some examples of this.
So for example the weights Heights an age of respondents in a survey would represent continuous variables
because each of those features is on a continuous scale.
However things like a person's gender occupation or marital status those are going to be categorical
or discrete variables because they're categories and they're not really on a continuous scale so that's
continuous versus categorical.
Now using bar charts we can visualize categorical data.
Typically the x axis is the categories and the y axis is the count that is the number of occurrences
in each category.
You should note though that there's lots of different variations on bar charts.
Some of them not so good and some of them pretty OK.
And what I mean by that is sometimes people like to change what the Y-axis actually stands for since
it can't theoretically be any aggregation not just the count of the number and sometimes people like
to show the count the sum or the average and more you should keep in mind that your bar chart should
always make pretty clear what you're actually representing.
As far as the length or height of those bars by default it's almost always count.
But sometimes people like to use some's there.
And if you don't make that clear to the user it could be confusing.
So let's see some examples to kind of drill down on this a bit more.
Here we see a basic bar chart of the 2018 Winter Olympic medals by country.
So what we're showing here is the count of the actual medals one per country.
So I can see here that Norway got the most medals then it was Germany then it was Canada and so on.
And notice here that there's actually spaces in between these bars.
And the reason they're spaces in between them is because each of these bars is going to represent a
different category.
And in this case each category is a different country.
So later on when we learn about histograms we'll see plots that kind of look similar to this except
the x axis is actually going to be continuous.
So for right now keep in mind that these bar charts were didn't have categories on the x axis.
Now when you're dealing with Olympic medals it might be nice to know the Olympic medals won that were
gold versus silver versus bronze.
So what we can do is have a stacked bar chart and a stack the bar chart what it can do is show another
level of category counts for your already existing categories.
So here based on the actual color of the bar Elda know whether we won some bronze medals some silver
medals or some gold medals and here we've actually color coded them as well to match those medals themselves.
So here now we can get a scale of what countries want a lot of bronze medals versus silver medals.
Now the only problem with this sort of stacked bar chart is that within a single bar it can be kind
of hard to compare actual categories of medals for example here.
It's a little hard to tell in regards to Norway.
The very first bar on the left is they have more gold medals or if they have more silver medals so people
sometimes like to do is instead of a stack the bar chart like this.
They do what's known as a nested bar chart where we basically then separate each of those bars and then
stick them together.
Notice how from before our Y-axis went all the way up to 40 and now with a nested bar chart it's down
to 14 because we went ahead and separated the metals further by category and put them next to each other.
What's nice about this is I can clearly tell that Norway got just as many silver medals as they did
gold medals and that Germany and Norway actually got the same number of gold medals.
So with this now I can see the information to compare actual types of medal counts here.
Now it's not so easy to do is answer the question how many medals did Norway get in total here would
have to do a little bit of math.
So it has to see OK 14 plus 14 plus.
It looks like 11 verses in the stacked bar chart.
I can very quickly see the total number.
So again it's a tradeoff here between kind of totals versus Category specifics.
So keep that in mind as you're messing around of bar charts.
OK.
So let's go out and jump to a text editor and actually create some of these bar charts to get a better
understanding of plotless syntax for bar charts.
Let's jump to the text editor now.
OK so here we are at basic pi or whatever your dot PI script is and we're going to import plot the dot
off line as p while and then we'll import plot Lee thought graph objects as go.
And since we're going to be working with real data that went through Olympics data or going to do is
to import pand those as PD and we'll set our data frame DMF equal to PD thought.
Read CXXVI and I'm going to read from my data folder the 2018 Winter Olympics and that's a CSFB file.
So there's my data.
Let's go ahead and print it out just so he can see what it actually looks like when we run this.
Keep in mind that a little zoomed in here so I might need to zoom out in order to see the whole data
set.
So if we kind of expand this just a little bit me zoom out and then rerun this week and see what it
actually looks like.
It's essentially we have a rank column showing the actual rank of who placed the most medals for Norway
is in first place Germany and second Canada third.
Then we have the actual country name.
Norway Germany Canada and then we can see gold silver bronze and the total number of medals.
So now that we have that information and we know what the columns are let's go ahead and use that to
actually plot this out as a bar chart.
So we'll start off with just putting out the totals we'll say creator data list and inside of the list
that's where we passen our go dots.
And since it's a bar chart we call it bar and the bar needs X information and Y information.
So for X we want to do is we going to want to pass in a categorical value and in this case that's going
to be the actual column for the country name.
So say DSF in this case it's an O C which stands for International Olympic Committee.
And then why it's going to be whatever you want to play on the waxes that's a continuous variable.
So in this case we'll go ahead and plot out the Count totals here.
So I'll say why is equal to DMF total.
So there's our data and if we want we can also create a laya object from go that lay out and we'll set
the title equal to something like metal's and let's go and plot this out so we'll create a figure object
thig is equal to go figure.
You're And remember we passen data and Leo and let's say P while that plot will pass and that fig and
plot it up.
So let's run this now Python basic that pi and make sure we don't get any errors.
Looks like the expected.
Most arguments let me.
I think I made the mistake here of not specifying what the data and layout is equal to layout.
So let's say that and try this again and there we go.
So having done that you should be able to bring in your medal count.
So as you hover over these you'll be able to see the total at the top of the actual bars.
OK.
So let's go in and expand on this by not just displaying the totals themselves but also the actual type
of metal.
So for this we're going to need to take the approach of three traces inside our data.
So to do that we're going to do is data equal to a list.
Trace 1 trace 2 and trace 3.
So we're going to have each of these traces correspond to a different bar plot that we'll then put in
then to zoom out a little bit and get myself a little more room to work with.
OK so let's go ahead and create these Trace's will say trace 1 and here we're going to create a Bircher
and the Bartter it's going to take an x value and the x value is still going to be the category of N
O C.
So that's the actual country column but for the y value we'll go ahead to have trace 1 B the gold column.
So the Y will be d f gold and then we can name this whatever we want we'll go ahead and name it gold
since that makes sense.
So the legend will actually display gold there.
And if you want to change the actual color where you can do is as another argument specify a marker
and then pass in a dictionary color and then a string hexadecimal code that corresponds to color.
So if you google color picker you can go ahead and grab a little hex code that looks like the color
gold to you.
So going do hash tag f f d 7 0 0 that's basically the color gold.
And then I'm going to have this on two lines.
So it's a little more readable.
OK.
So that's our bar chart for gold.
And if I were just a plot trace one and remove trace two trees three I would essentially see the same
bar plot as before except the numbers would be reduced because it would only show the gold if I want
to stack on top of this silver and bronze.
What I need to do is set two more traces for each of those.
So we're going to do the same thing here except we'll say trace 2 and trace 3 and we'll change gold.
And the second one to be silver.
Let's also change the name to the silver and then the third one will change the names of the bronze
and we'll also change this one.
So basically it's a gold chain silver is silver and bronze.
And then we just want to add our colors as well.
So here for the silver one a nice hexadecimal code for silver is kind of this grayish color.
So I'll say 9 0 a 1 and for the bronze we'll go ahead and say the color.
See the seven f 32 and you can always just copy and paste these codes from the provided notes.
So now that we have our three Trace's or three bar plots if we plot like this what plotless is going
to do is it's going to do the nested bar chart.
That is it's going to show the gold column right next to the silver column right next to the bronze
column.
So let's go ahead and run this at our command line.
We'll say Python basic that pi enter.
And when you run that you're going to see that nested bar chart that looks something like this.
So here we can see that plot went ahead and put those columns right next to each other.
And as you hover over any particular country it will go ahead and show you that counts for bronze silver
and gold and you can always zoom in.
You can do a box select if you only want to do that or pan zoom.
It's all available to here.
So you can get a better view of certain countries.
All right.
So let's imagine now you wanted the actual stacked bar plot not the nested one where you need to do
is just simply come down here to where it says the actual layout.
So right now we have title metal's what we need to do is inside of Leo.
You provide the code bar mode and set that equal to the string stack.
So again to change from a nested bar plot to the stacked bar plot inside of the last call you need a
called bar mode is equal to stack and that's basically something either have to memorize or go back
to documentation for a reference for.
OK so let's save that and make sure that worked I'll say Python basic but pi.
Enter And now when we call that plot we can see here we actually get the stacked bar plot and all the
same tools apply you can zoom in Pan et cetera.
So let's quickly review what we did here.
We went ahead and read some real data.
We took a look at the data frame and then we set three bar plots here each other a trace put those traces
into a list for the data.
You can specify the layout and then go ahead and plot the data and the layout and then have the figure
that's really all there is to it.
If you have any questions feel free to post the Q&A forms.
We'll see you at the next lecture.